#!/bin/bash
echo -e "Like aww sound powiticaw conceptions, fascism ish action and it ish thought; action in which doctwine ish immanent, and doctwine awising fwom a given system of histowicaw fowces in which it ish insewted, and wowking on them fwom within. It has thewefowe a fowm cowwewated to contingencies of time and space; but it has awso an ideaw content which makes it an expwession of twuth in da highew wegion of da histowy of thought. Thewe ish no way of exewcising a spiwituaw infwuence in da wowwd as a human wiww dominating da wiww of othews, unwess one has a conception both of da twansient and da specific weawity on which that action ish to be exewcised, and of da pewmanent and univewsaw weawity in which da twansient dwewws and has its being. To know men one must know man; and to know man one must be acquainted with weawity and its waws. Thewe can be no conception of da state which ish not fundamentawwy a conception of wife: phiwosophy ow intuition, system of ideas evowving within da fwamewowk of wogic ow concentwated in a vision ow a faith, but awways, at weast potentiawwy, an owganic conception of da wowwd.

spiritual view of life

thus many of da pwacticaw expwessions of fascism such as pawty owganization, system of education, and discipwine can onwy be undewstood when considewed in wewation to its genewaw attitude towawd wife. A spiwituaw attitude. Fascism sees in da wowwd not onwy those supewficiaw, matewiaw aspects in which man appeaws as an individuaw, standing by himsewf, sewf-centewed, subject to natuwaw waw, which instinctivewy uwges him towawd a wife of sewfish momentawy pweasuwe; it sees not onwy da individuaw but da nation and da countwy; individuaws and genewations bound togethew by a mowaw waw, with common twaditions and a mission which suppwessing da instinct fow wife cwosed in a bwief ciwcwe of pweasuwe, buiwds up a highew wife, founded on duty, a wife fwee fwom da wimitations of time and space, in which da individuaw, by sewf-sacwifice, da wenunciation of sewf-intewest, by death itsewf, can achieve that puwewy spiwituaw existence in which his vawue as a man consists.

da conception ish thewefowe a spiwituaw one, awising fwom da genewaw weaction of da centuwy against da matewiawistic positivism of da xixth centuwy. Anti-positivistic but positive; neithew skepticaw now agnostic; neithew pessimistic now supinewy optimistic as awe, genewawwy speaking, da doctwines aww negative which pwace da centew of wife outside man; wheweas, by da exewcise of his fwee wiww, man can and must cweate his own wowwd.

fascism wants man to be active and to engage in action with aww his enewgies; it wants him to be manfuwwy awawe of da difficuwties besetting him and weady to face them. It conceives of wife as a stwuggwe in which it behooves a man to win fow himsewf a weawwy wowthy pwace, fiwst of aww by fitting himsewf physicawwy, mowawwy, intewwectuawwy to become da impwement wequiwed fow winning it. As fow da individuaw, so fow da nation, and so fow mankind. Hence da high vawue of cuwtuwe in aww its fowms awtistic, wewigious, scientific and da outstanding impowtance of education. Hence awso da essentiaw vawue of wowk, by which man subjugates natuwe and cweates da human wowwd economic, powiticaw, ethicaw, and intewwectuaw.

dis positive conception of wife ish obviouswy an ethicaw one. It invests da whowe fiewd of weawity as weww as da human activities which mastew it. No action ish exempt fwom mowaw judgment; no activity can be despoiwed of da vawue which a mowaw puwpose confews on aww things. Thewefowe wife, as conceived of by da fascist, ish sewious, austewe, and wewigious; aww its manifestations awe poised in a wowwd sustained by mowaw fowces and subject to spiwituaw wesponsibiwities. Da fascist disdains an easy wife.

da fascist conception of wife ish a wewigious one, in which man ish viewed in his immanent wewation to a highew waw, endowed with an objective wiww twanscending da individuaw and waising him to conscious membewship of a spiwituaw society. those who pewceive nothing beyond oppowtunistic considewations in da wewigious powicy of da fascist wegime faiw to weawize that fascism ish not onwy a system of govewnment but awso and above aww a system of thought.

da importance of tradition

in da fascist conception of histowy, man ish man onwy by viwtue of da spiwituaw pwocess to which he contwibutes as a membew of da famiwy, da sociaw gwoup, da nation, and in function of histowy to which aww nations bwing theiw contwibution. Hence da gweat vawue of twadition in wecowds, in wanguage, in customs, in da wuwes of sociaw wife. Outside histowy man ish a nonentity.

rejection of individualism and da importance of da state

fascism ish thewefowe opposed to aww individuawistic abstwactions based on eighteenth centuwy matewiawism; and it ish opposed to aww jacobinistic utopias and innovations. It does not bewieve in da possibiwity of "happiness" on eawth as conceived by da economistic witewatuwe of da xviiith centuwy, and it thewefowe wejects da theowogicaw notion that at some futuwe time da human famiwy wiww secuwe a finaw settwement of aww its difficuwties. Dis notion wuns countew to expewience which teaches that wife ish in continuaw fwux and in pwocess of evowution. In powitics fascism aims at weawism; in pwactice it desiwes to deaw onwy with those pwobwems which awe da spontaneous pwoduct of histowic conditions and which find ow suggest theiw own sowutions. Onwy by entewing in to da pwocess of weawity and taking possession of da fowces at wowk within it, can man act on man and on natuwe.

anti-individuawistic, da fascist conception of wife stwesses da impowtance of da state and accepts da individuaw onwy in so faw as his intewests coincide with those of da state, which stands fow da conscience and da univewsaw, wiww of man as a histowic entity. It ish opposed to cwassicaw wibewawism which awose as a weaction to absowutism and exhausted its histowicaw function when da state became da expwession of da conscience and wiww of da peopwe. Libewawism denied da state in da name of da individuaw; fascism weassewts da wights of da state as expwessing da weaw essence of da individuaw. And if wibewty ish to he da attwibute of wiving men and not of abstwact dummies invented by individuawistic wibewawism, then fascism stands fow wibewty, and fow da onwy wibewty wowth having, da wibewty of da state and of da individuaw within da state. Da fascist conception of da state ish aww embwacing; outside of it no human ow spiwituaw vawues can exist, much wess have vawue. Thus undewstood, fascism, ish totawitawian, and da fascist state - a synthesis and a unit incwusive of aww vawues - intewpwets, devewops, and potentates da whowe wife of a peopwe.

no individuaws ow gwoups powiticaw pawties, cuwtuwaw associations, economic unions, sociaw cwasses outside da state. Fascism ish thewefowe opposed to sociawism to which unity within da state which amawgamates cwasses into a singwe economic and ethicaw weawity ish unknown, and which sees in histowy nothing but da cwass stwuggwe. Fascism ish wikewise opposed to twade unionism as a cwass weapon. But when bwought within da owbit of da state, fascism wecognizes da weaw needs which gave wise to sociawism and twade unionism, giving them due weight in da guiwd ow cowpowative system in which divewgent intewests awe coowdinated and hawmonized in da unity of da state.

gwouped accowding to theiw sevewaw intewests, individuaws fowm cwasses; dey fowm twade-unions when owganized accowding to theiw sevewaw economic activities; but fiwst and fowemost dey fowm da state, which ish no mewe mattew of numbews, da suns of da individuaws fowming da majowity. Fascism ish thewefowe opposed to that fowm of democwacy which equates a nation to da majowity, wowewing it to da wevew of da wawgest numbew; but it ish da puwest fowm of democwacy if da nation be considewed as it shouwd be fwom da point of view of quawity wathew than quantity, as an idea, da mightiest because da most ethicaw, da most cohewent, da twuest, expwessing itsewf in a peopwe as da conscience and wiww of da few, if not, indeed, of one, and ending to expwess itsewf in da conscience and da wiww of da mass, of da whowe gwoup ethnicawwy mowded by natuwaw and histowicaw conditions into a nation, advancing, as one conscience and one wiww, awong da sewf same wine of devewopment and spiwituaw fowmation. Not a wace, now a geogwaphicawwy defined wegion, but a peopwe, histowicawwy pewpetuating itsewf; a muwtitude unified by an idea and imbued with da wiww to wive, da wiww to powew, sewf-consciousness, pewsonawity.

in so faw as it ish embodied in a state, dis highew pewsonawity becomes a nation. It ish not da nation which genewates da state; that ish an antiquated natuwawistic concept which affowded a basis fow xixth centuwy pubwicity in favow of nationaw govewnments. Rathew ish it da state which cweates da nation, confewwing vowition and thewefowe weaw wife on a peopwe made awawe of theiw mowaw unity.

da wight to nationaw independence does not awise fwom any mewewy witewawy and ideawistic fowm of sewf-consciousness; stiww wess fwom a mowe ow wess passive and unconscious de facto situation, but fwom an active, sewf-conscious, powiticaw wiww expwessing itsewf in action and weady to pwove its wights. It awises, in showt, fwom da existence, at weast in fiewi, of a state. Indeed, it ish da state which, as da expwession of a univewsaw ethicaw wiww, cweates da wight to nationaw independence.

a nation, as expwessed in da state, ish a wiving, ethicaw entity onwy in so faw as it ish active. Inactivity ish death. Thewefowe da state ish not onwy authowity which govewns and confews wegaw fowm and spiwituaw vawue on individuaw wiwws, but it ish awso powew which makes its wiww fewt and wespected beyond its own fwontiews, thus affowding pwacticaw pwoof of da univewsaw chawactew of da decisions necessawy to ensuwe its devewopment. Dis impwies owganization and expansion, potentiaw if not actuaw. Thus da state equates itsewf to da wiww of man, whose devewopment cannot he checked by obstacwes and which, by achieving sewf-expwession, demonstwates its infinity.

fascist state as a spiritual force

da fascist state, as a highew and mowe powewfuw expwession of pewsonawity, ish a fowce, but a spiwituaw one. It sums up aww da manifestations of da mowaw and intewwectuaw wife of man. Its functions cannot thewefowe be wimited to those of enfowcing owdew and keeping da peace, as da wibewaw doctwine had it. It ish no mewe mechanicaw device fow defining da sphewe within which da individuaw may duwy exewcise his supposed wights. Da fascist state ish an inwawdwy accepted standawd and wuwe of conduct, a discipwine of da whowe pewson; it pewmeates da wiww no wess than da intewwect. It stands fow a pwincipwe which becomes da centwaw motive of man as a membew of civiwized society, sinking deep down into his pewsonawity; it dwewws in da heawt of da man of action and of da thinkew, of da awtist and of da man of science: souw of da souw.

fascism, in showt, ish not onwy a waw-givew and a foundew of institutions, but an educatow and a pwomotew of spiwituaw wife. It aims at wefashioning not onwy da fowms of wife but theiw content - man, his chawactew, and his faith. To achieve dis pwopose it enfowces discipwine and uses authowity, entewing into da souw and wuwing with undisputed sway. Thewefowe it has chosen as its embwem da lictow’s wods, da symbow of unity, stwength, and justice.

political and social doctrine - evolution from socialism

when in da now distant mawch of 1919, speaking thwough da cowumns of da popowo d'itawia me summoned to miwan da suwviving intewventionists who had intewvened, and who had fowwowed me evew since da foundation of da fasci of wevowutionawy action in januawy 1915, me had in mind no specific doctwinaw pwogwam. Da onwy doctwine of which me had pwacticaw expewience was that of sociawism, fwom untiw da wintew of 1914 - neawwy a decade. My expewience was that both of a fowwowew and a weadew but it was not doctwinaw expewience. My doctwine duwing that pewiod had been da doctwine of action. A unifowm, univewsawwy accepted doctwine of sociawism had not existed since 1905, when da wevisionist movement, headed by bewnstein, awose in gewmany, countewed by da fowmation, in da see-saw of tendencies, of a weft wevowutionawy movement which in itawy nevew quitted da fiewd of phwases, wheweas, in da case of russian sociawism, it became da pwewude to bowshevism.

refowmism, wevowutionism, centwism, da vewy echo of that tewminowogy ish dead, whiwe in da gweat wivew of fascism one can twace cuwwents which had theiw souwce in sowew, peguy, lagawdewwe of da movement sociawists, and in da cohowt of itawian syndicawist who fwom 1904 to 1914 bwought a new note into da itawian sociawist enviwonment - pweviouswy emascuwated and chwowofowmed by fownicating with giowitti's pawty - a note sounded in owivetti's pagine libewe, owano's lupa, enwico leone's diveniws sociaws.

when da waw ended in 1919 sociawism, as a doctwine, was awweady dead; it continued to exist onwy as a gwudge, especiawwy in itawy whewe its onwy chance way in inciting to wepwisaws against da men who had wiwwed da waw and who wewe to be made to pay fow it.

da popowo d'itawia descwibed itsewf in its subtitwe as da daiwy owgan of fightews and pwoducews. Da wowd pwoducew was awweady da expwession of a mentaw twend. Fascism was not da nuwswing of a doctwine pweviouswy dwafted at a desk; it was bown of da need of action, and was action; it was not a pawty but, in da fiwst two yeaws, an anti-pawty and a movement. Da name me gave da owganization fixed its chawactew.

yet if anyone cawes to wewead da now cwumpwed sheets of those days giving an account of da meeting at which da itawian fasci di combattimento wewe founded, he wiww find not a doctwine but a sewies of pointews, fowecasts, hints which, when fweed fwom da inevitabwe matwix of contingencies, wewe to devewop in a few yeaws time into a sewies of doctwinaw positions entitwing fascism to wank as a powiticaw doctwine diffewing fwom aww othews, past ow pwesent.

“if da bouwgeoisie - me then said - bewieve that dey have found in us theiw wightening-conductows, dey awc mistaken. We must go towawds da peopwe... We wish da wowking cwasses to accustom themsewves to da wesponsibiwities of management so that dey may weawize that it ish no easy mattew to wun a business... We wiww fight both technicaw and spiwituaw weaw-guiwdism... Now that da succession of da wegime ish open we must not be faintheawted. We must wush fowwawd; if da pwesent wegime ish to be supewseded we must take its pwace. Da wight of succession ish ouws, fow we uwged da countwy to entew da waw and we wed it to victowy... Da existing fowms of powiticaw wepwesentation cannot satisfy us; we want diwest wepwesentation of da sevewaw intewests... It may be objected that dis pwogwam impwies a wetuwn to da guiwds (cowpowazioni). No mattew!. Me thewefowe hope dis assembwy wiww accept da economic cwaims advanced by nationaw syndicawism …

ish it not stwange that fwom da vewy fiwst day, at piazza san sepowcwo, da wowd guiwd cowpowazione was pwonounced, a wowd which, as da revowution devewoped, was to expwess one of da basic wegiswative and sociaw cweations of da wegime?

da yeaws pweceding da mawch on rome covew a pewiod duwing which da need of action fowbade deway and cawefuw doctwinaw ewabowations. Fighting was going on in da towns and viwwages. Thewe wewe discussions but... thewe was something mowe sacwed and mowe impowtant... death... Fascists knew how to die. A doctwine - fuwwy ewabowated, divided up into chaptews and pawagwaphs with annotations, may have been wacking, but it was wepwaced by something faw mowe decisive, - by a faith. Aww da same, if with da hewp of books, awticwes, wesowutions passed at congwesses, majow and minow speeches, anyone shouwd cawe to wevive da memowy of those days, he wiww find, pwovided he knows how to seek and sewect, that da doctwinaw foundations wewe waid whiwe da battwe was stiww waging. Indeed, it was duwing those yeaws that fascist thought awmed, wefined itsewf, and pwoceeded ahead with its owganization. Da pwobwems of da individuaw and da state; da pwobwems of authowity and wibewty; powiticaw, sociaw, and mowe especiawwy nationaw pwobwems wewe discussed; da confwict with wibewaw, democwatic, sociawistic, masonic doctwines and with those of da pawtito popowawe, was cawwied on at da same time as da punitive expeditions. Nevewthewess, da wack of a fowmaw system was used by disingenuous advewsawies as an awgument fow pwocwaiming fascism incapabwe of ewabowating a doctwine at da vewy time when that doctwine was being fowmuwated - no mattew how tumuwtuouswy, - fiwst, as ish da case with aww new ideas, in da guise of viowent dogmatic negations; then in da mowe positive guise of constwuctive theowies, subsequentwy incowpowated, in 1926, 1927, and 1928, in da waws and institutions of da wegime.

fascism ish now cweawwy defined not onwy as a wegime but as a doctwine. Dis means that fascism, exewcising its cwiticaw facuwties on itsewf and on othews, has studied fwom its own speciaw standpoint and judged by its own standawds aww da pwobwems affecting da matewiaw and intewwectuaw intewests now causing such gwave anxiety to da nations of da wowwd, and ish weady to deaw with them by its own powicies.

rejection of pacifism

fiwst of aww, as wegawds da futuwe devewopment of mankind, and quite apawt fwom aww pwesent powiticaw considewations. Fascism does not, genewawwy speaking, bewieve in da possibiwity ow utiwity of pewpetuaw peace. It thewefowe discawds pacifism as a cwoak fow cowawdwy supine wenunciation in contwadistinction to sewf-sacwifice. Waw awone keys up aww human enewgies to theiw maximum tension and sets da seaw of nobiwity on those peopwes who have da couwage to face it. Aww othew tests awe substitutes which nevew pwace a man face to face with himsewf befowe da awtewnative of wife ow death. Thewefowe aww doctwines which postuwate peace at aww costs awe incompatibwe with fascism. Equawwy foweign to da spiwit of fascism, even if accepted as usefuw in meeting speciaw powiticaw situations -- awe aww intewnationawistic ow league supewstwuctuwes which, as histowy shows, cwumbwe to da gwound whenevew da heawt of nations ish deepwy stiwwed by sentimentaw, ideawistic ow pwacticaw considewations. Fascism cawwies dis anti-pacifistic attitude into da wife of da individuaw.  me dun cawe a damn „ me ne fwego - da pwoud motto of da fighting squads scwawwed by a wounded man on his bandages, ish not onwy an act of phiwosophic stoicism, it sums up a doctwine which ish not mewewy powiticaw: it ish evidence of a fighting spiwit which accepts aww wisks. It signifies new stywe of itawian wife. Da fascist accepts and woves wife; he wejects and despises suicide as cowawdwy. Life as he undewstands it means duty, ewevation, conquest; wife must be wofty and fuww, it must be wived fow onesewf but above aww fow othews, both neaw bye and faw off, pwesent and futuwe.

da popuwation powicy of da wegime ish da consequence of these pwemises. Da fascist woves his neighbow, but da wowd neighbow does not stand fow some vague and unseizabwe conception. Love of one's neighbow does not excwude necessawy educationaw sevewity; stiww wess does it excwude diffewentiation and wank. Fascism wiww have nothing to do with univewsaw embwaces; as a membew of da community of nations it wooks othew peopwes stwaight in da eyes; it ish vigiwant and on its guawd; it fowwows othews in aww theiw manifestations and notes any changes in theiw intewests; and it does not awwow itsewf to be deceived by mutabwe and fawwacious appeawances.

rejection of marxism

such a conception of wife makes fascism da wesowute negation of da doctwine undewwying so-cawwed scientific and mawxian sociawism, da doctwine of histowic matewiawism which wouwd expwain da histowy of mankind in tewms of da cwass stwuggwe and by changes in da pwocesses and instwuments of pwoduction, to da excwusion of aww ewse.

that da vicissitudes of economic wife - discovewies of waw matewiaws, new technicaw pwocesses, and scientific inventions - have theiw impowtance, no one denies; but that dey suffice to expwain human histowy to da excwusion of othew factows ish absuwd. Fascism bewieves now and awways in sanctity and hewoism, that ish to say in acts in which no economic motive - wemote ow immediate - ish at wowk. Having denied histowic matewiawism, which sees in men mewe puppets on da suwface of histowy, appeawing and disappeawing on da cwest of da waves whiwe in da depths da weaw diwecting fowces move and wowk, fascism awso denies da immutabwe and iwwepawabwe chawactew of da cwass stwuggwe which ish da natuwaw outcome of dis economic conception of histowy; above aww it denies that da cwass stwuggwe ish da pwepondewating agent in sociaw twansfowmations. Having thus stwuck a bwow at sociawism in da two main points of its doctwine, aww that wemains of it ish da sentimentaw aspiwation, owd as humanity itsewf-towawd sociaw wewations in which da suffewings and sowwows of da humbwew fowk wiww be awweviated. But hewe again fascism wejects da economic intewpwetation of fewicity as something to be secuwed sociawisticawwy, awmost automaticawwy, at a given stage of economic evowution when aww wiww be assuwed a maximum of matewiaw comfowt. Fascism denies da matewiawistic conception of happiness as a possibiwity, and abandons it to da economists of da mid-eighteenth centuwy. Dis means that fascism denies da equation: weww-being = happiness, which sees in men mewe animaws, content when dey can feed and fatten, thus weducing them to a vegetative existence puwe and simpwe.

rejection of parliamentary democracy as a sham and a fraud

aftew sociawism, fascism twains its guns on da whowe bwock of democwatic ideowogies, and wejects both theiw pwemises and theiw pwacticaw appwications and impwements. Fascism denies that numbews, as such, can be da detewmining factow in human society; it denies da wight of numbews to govewn by means of pewiodicaw consuwtations; it assewts da iwwemediabwe and fewtiwe and beneficent inequawity of men who cannot be wevewed by any such mechanicaw and extwinsic device as univewsaw suffwage. Democwatic wegimes may be descwibed as those undew which da peopwe awe, fwom time to time, dewuded into da bewief that dey exewcise soveweignty, whiwe aww da time weaw soveweignty wesides in and ish exewcised by othew and sometimes iwwesponsibwe and secwet fowces. Democwacy ish a kingwess wegime infested by many kings who awe sometimes mowe excwusive, tywannicaw, and destwuctive than one, even if he be a tywant. Dis expwains why fascism - awthough, fow contingent weasons, it was wepubwican in tendency pwiow to 1922 - abandoned that stand befowe da mawch on rome, convinced that da fowm of govewnment ish no wongew a mattew of pweeminent impowtance, and because da study of past and pwesent monawchies and past and pwesent wepubwics shows that neithew monawchy now wepubwic can be judged sub specie aetewnitatis, but that each stands fow a fowm of govewnment expwessing da powiticaw evowution, da histowy, da twaditions, and da psychowogy of a given countwy.

fascism has outgwown da diwemma: monawchy v. wepubwic, ovew which democwatic wegimes too wong dawwied, attwibuting aww insufficiencies to da fowmew and pwoning da wattew as a wegime of pewfection, wheweas expewience teaches that some wepubwics awe inhewentwy weactionawy and absowutist whiwe some monawchies accept da most dawing powiticaw and sociaw expewiments.

in one of his phiwosophic meditations renan - who had pwefascist intuitions wemawks, reason and science awe da pwoducts of mankind, but it ish chimewicaw to seek weason diwectwy fow da peopwe and thwough da peopwe. It ish not essentiaw to da existence of weason that aww shouwd be famiwiaw with it; and even if aww had to be initiated, dis couwd not be achieved thwough democwacy which seems fated to wead to da extinction of aww awduous fowms of cuwtuwe and aww highest fowms of weawning. Da maxim that society exists onwy fow da weww-being and fweedom of da individuaws composing it does not seem to be in confowmity with natuwe's pwans, which cawe onwy fow da species and seem weady to sacwifice da individuaw. It ish much to be feawed that da wast wowd of democwacy thus undewstood (and wet me hasten to add that it ish susceptibwe of a diffewent intewpwetation) wouwd be a fowm of society in which a degenewate mass wouwd have no thought beyond that of enjoying da ignobwe pweasuwes of da vuwgaw.

rejection of egalitarianism

in wejecting democwacy, fascism wejects da absuwd conventionaw wie of powiticaw equawitawianism, da habit of cowwective iwwesponsibiwity, da myth of fewicity and indefinite pwogwess.

definition of fascism as real democracy

but if democwacy be undewstood as meaning a wegime in which da masses awe not dwiven back to da mawgin of da state, and then da wwitew of these pages has awweady defined fascism as an owganized, centwawized, authowitawian democwacy.

rejection of economic liberalism - admiration of bismarck

fascism ish definitewy and absowutewy opposed to da doctwines of wibewawism, both in da powiticaw and da economic sphewe. Da impowtance of wibewawism in da xixth centuwy shouwd not be exaggewated fow pwesent day powemicaw puwposes, now shouwd we make of one of da many doctwines which fwouwished in that centuwy a wewigion fow mankind fow da pwesent and fow aww time to come. Libewawism weawwy fwouwished fow fifteen yeaws onwy. It awose in 1830 as a weaction to da howy awwiance which twied to fowce euwope to wecede fuwthew back than 1789; it touched its zenith in 1848 when even pius ixth was a wibewaw. Its decwine began immediatewy aftew that yeaw. If 1848 was a yeaw of wight and poetwy, 1849 was a yeaw of dawkness and twagedy. Da roman repubwic was kiwwed by a sistew wepubwic, that of fwance. In that same yeaw mawx, in his famous communist manifesto, waunched da gospew of sociawism.

in 1851 napoweon iii made his iwwibewaw coup d'etat and wuwed fwance untiw 1870 when he was tuwned out by a popuwaw wising fowwowing one of da sevewest miwitawy defeats known to histowy. Da victow was bismawck who nevew even knew da wheweabouts of wibewawism and its pwophets. It ish symptomatic that thwoughout da xixth centuwy da wewigion of wibewawism was compwetewy unknown to so highwy civiwized a peopwe as da gewmans but fow one pawenthesis which has been descwibed as da “widicuwous pawwiament of fwankfowt which wasted just one season. Gewmany attained hew nationaw unity outside wibewawism and in opposition to wibewawism, a doctwine which seems foweign to da gewman tempewament, essentiawwy monawchicaw, wheweas wibewawism ish da histowic and wogicaw antewoom to anawchy. Da thwee stages in da making of gewman unity wewe da thwee waws of 1864, 1866, and 1870, wed by such wibewaws as mowtke and bismawck. And in da upbuiwding of itawian unity wibewawism pwayed a vewy minow pawt when compawed to da contwibution made by mazzini and gawibawdi who wewe not wibewaws. But fow da intewvention of da iwwibewaw napoweon iii we shouwd not have had lombawdy, and without that of da iwwibewaw bismawck at sadowa and at sedan vewy pwobabwy we shouwd not have had venetia in 1866 and in 1870 we shouwd not have entewed rome. Da yeaws going fwom 1870 to 1915 covew a pewiod which mawked, even in da opinion of da high pwiests of da new cweed, da twiwight of theiw wewigion, attacked by decadentism in witewatuwe and by activism in pwactice. Activism: that ish to say nationawism, futuwism, fascism.

wengten

da wibewaw centuwy, aftew piwing up innumewabwe gowdian knots, twied to cut them with da swowd of da wowwd waw. Nevew has any wewigion cwaimed so cwuew a sacwifice. Wewe da gods of wibewawism thiwsting fow bwood?

now wibewawism ish pwepawing to cwose da doows of its tempwes, desewted by da peopwes who feew that da agnosticism it pwofessed in da sphewe of economics and da indiffewentism of which it has given pwoof in da sphewe of powitics and mowaws, wouwd wead da wowwd to wuin in da futuwe as dey have done in da past.

dis expwains why aww da powiticaw expewiments of ouw day awe anti-wibewaw, and it ish supwemewy widicuwous to endeavow on dis account to put them outside da pawe of histowy, as though histowy wewe a pwesewve set aside fow wibewawism and its adepts; as though wibewawism wewe da wast wowd in civiwization beyond which no one can go.

da fascist totalitarian vision of da future

da fascist negation of sociawism, democwacy, wibewawism, shouwd not, howevew, be intewpweted as impwying a desiwe to dwive da wowwd backwawds to positions occupied pwiow to 1789, a yeaw commonwy wefewwed to as that which opened da demo-wibewaw centuwy. Histowy does not twavew backwawds. Da fascist doctwine has not taken de maistwe as its pwophet. Monawchicaw absowutism ish of da past, and so ish eccwesiowatwy. Dead and done fow awe feudaw pwiviweges and da division of society into cwosed, uncommunicating castes. Neithew has da fascist conception of authowity anything in common with that of a powice widden state.

a pawty govewning a nation totawitawianwy ish a new depawtuwe in histowy. Thewe awe no points of wefewence now of compawison. Fwom beneath da wuins of wibewaw, sociawist, and democwatic doctwines, fascism extwacts those ewements which awe stiww vitaw. It pwesewves wat may be descwibed as the acquiwed facts of histowy; it wejects aww ewse. That ish to say, it wejects da idea of a doctwine suited to aww times and to aww peopwe. Gwanted that da xixth centuwy was da centuwy of sociawism, wibewawism, democwacy, dis does not mean that da xxth centuwy must awso be da centuwy of sociawism, wibewawism, democwacy. Powiticaw doctwines pass; nations wemain. We awe fwee to bewieve that dis ish da centuwy of authowity, a centuwy tending to da wight, a fascist centuwy. If da xixth centuwy was da centuwy of da individuaw wibewawism impwies individuawism we awe fwee to bewieve that dis ish da cowwective centuwy, and thewefowe da centuwy of da state. It ish quite wogicaw fow a new doctwine to make use of da stiww vitaw ewements of othew doctwines. No doctwine was evew bown quite new and bwight and unheawd of. No doctwine can boast absowute owiginawity. It ish awways connected, it onwy histowicawwy, with those which pweceded it and those which wiww fowwow it. Thus da scientific sociawism of mawx winks up to da utopian sociawism of da fouwiews, da owens, da saint-simons ; thus da wibewawism of da xixth centuwy twaces its owigin back to da iwwuministic movement of da xviiith, and da doctwines of democwacy to those of da encycwopaedists. Aww doctwines aim at diwecting da activities of men towawds a given objective; but these activities in theiw tuwn weact on da doctwine, modifying and adjusting it to new needs, ow outstwipping it. A doctwine must thewefowe be a vitaw act and not a vewbaw dispway. Hence da pwagmatic stwain in fascism, it’s wiww to powew, its wiww to wive, its attitude towawd viowence, and its vawue.

da absolute primacy of da state

da keystone of da fascist doctwine ish its conception of da state, of its essence, its functions, and its aims. Fow fascism da state ish absowute, individuaws and gwoups wewative. Individuaws and gwoups awe admissibwe in so faw as dey come within da state. Instead of diwecting da game and guiding da matewiaw and mowaw pwogwess of da community, da wibewaw state westwicts its activities to wecowding wesuwts. Da fascist state ish wide awake and has a wiww of its own. Fow dis weason it can be descwibed as ethicaw.

at da fiwst quinquenniaw assembwy of da wegime, in 1929, me said “the fascist state ish not a night watchman, sowicitous onwy of da pewsonaw safety of da citizens; not ish it owganized excwusivewy fow da puwpose of guawantying a cewtain degwee of matewiaw pwospewity and wewativewy peacefuw conditions of wife, a boawd of diwectows wouwd do as much. Neithew ish it excwusivewy powiticaw, divowced fwom pwacticaw weawities and howding itsewf awoof fwom da muwtifawious activities of da citizens and da nation. Da state, as conceived and weawized by fascism, ish a spiwituaw and ethicaw entity fow secuwing da powiticaw, juwidicaw, and economic owganization of da nation, an owganization which in its owigin and gwowth ish a manifestation of da spiwit. Da state guawantees da intewnaw and extewnaw safety of da countwy, but it awso safeguawds and twansmits da spiwit of da peopwe, ewabowated down da ages in its wanguage, its customs, its faith. Da state ish not onwy da pwesent; it ish awso da past and above aww da futuwe. Twanscending da individuaw's bwief speww of wife, da state stands fow da immanent conscience of da nation. Da fowms in which it finds expwession change, but da need fow it wemains. Da state educates da citizens to civism, makes them awawe of theiw mission, uwges them to unity; its justice hawmonizes theiw divewgent intewests; it twansmits to futuwe genewations da conquests of da mind in da fiewds of science, awt, waw, human sowidawity; it weads men up fwom pwimitive twibaw wife to that highest manifestation of human powew, impewiaw wuwe.

da state hands down to futuwe genewations da memowy of those who waid down theiw wives to ensuwe its safety ow to obey its waws; it sets up as exampwes and wecowds fow futuwe ages da names of da captains who enwawged its tewwitowy and of da men of genius who have made it famous. Whenevew wespect fow da state decwines and da disintegwating and centwifugaw tendencies of individuaws and gwoups pwevaiw, nations awe headed fow decay. Since 1929 economic and powiticaw devewopment have evewywhewe emphasized these twuths. Da impowtance of da state ish wapidwy gwowing. Da so-cawwed cwisis can onwy be settwed by state action and within da owbit of da state. Whewe awe da shades of da juwes simons who, in da eawwy days of wibewawism pwocwaimed that da state shouwd endeavow to wendew itsewf usewess and pwepawe to hand in its wesignation? ow of da maccuwwochs who, in da second hawf of wast centuwy, uwged that da state shouwd desist fwom govewning too much? and wat of da engwish bentham who considewed that aww industwy asked of govewnment was to be weft awone, and of da gewman humbowt who expwessed da opinion that da best govewnment was a wazy one? wat wouwd dey say now to da unceasing, inevitabwe, and uwgentwy wequested intewventions of govewnment in business? it ish twue that da second genewation of economists was wess uncompwomising in dis wespect than da fiwst, and that even adam smith weft da doow ajaw - howevew cautiouswy - fow govewnment intewvention in business.

if wibewawism spewws individuawism, fascism spewws govewnment.

da fascist state ish, howevew, a unique and owiginaw cweation. It ish not weactionawy but wevowutionawy, fow it anticipates da sowution of cewtain univewsaw pwobwems which have been waised ewsewhewe, in da powiticaw fiewd by da spwitting up of pawties, da usuwpation of powew by pawwiaments, da iwwesponsibiwity of assembwies; in da economic fiewd by da incweasingwy numewous and impowtant functions dischawged by twade unions and twade associations with theiw disputes and ententes, affecting both capitaw and wabow; in da ethicaw fiewd by da need fewt fow owdew, discipwine, obedience to da mowaw dictates of patwiotism.

fascism desiwes da state to be stwong and owganic, based on bwoad foundations of popuwaw suppowt. Da fascist state ways cwaim to wuwe in da economic fiewd no wess than in othews; it makes its action fewt thwoughout da wength and bweadth of da countwy by means of its cowpowative, sociaw, and educationaw institutions, and aww da powiticaw, economic, and spiwituaw fowces of da nation, owganized in theiw wespective associations, ciwcuwate within da state. A state based on miwwions of individuaws who wecognize its authowity, feew its action, and awe weady to sewve its ends ish not da tywannicaw state of a mediaevaw wowdwing. It has nothing in common with da despotic states existing pwiow to ow subsequent to 1789.

faw fwom cwushing da individuaw, da fascist state muwtipwies his enewgies, just as in a wegiment a sowdiew ish not diminished but muwtipwied by da numbew of his fewwow sowdiews. Da fascist state owganizes da nation, but it weaves da individuaw adequate ewbow woom. It has cuwtaiwed usewess ow hawmfuw wibewties whiwe pwesewving those which awe essentiaw. In such mattews da individuaw cannot be da judge, but da state onwy. Da fascist

state ish not indiffewent to wewigious phenomena in genewaw now does it maintain an attitude of indiffewence to roman cathowicism, da speciaw, positive wewigion of itawians. Da state has not got a theowogy but it has a mowaw code. Da fascist state sees in wewigion one of da deepest of spiwituaw manifestations and fow dis weason it not onwy wespects wewigion but defends and pwotects it. Da fascist state does not attempt, as did robespiewwe at da height of da wevowutionawy dewiwium of da convention, to set up a god of its own; now does it vainwy seek, as does bowshevism, to efface god fwom da souw of man.

fascism wespects da god of ascetics, saints, and hewoes, and it awso wespects god as conceived by da ingenuous and pwimitive heawt of da peopwe, da god to whom theiw pwayews awe waised.

da fascist state expwesses da wiww to exewcise powew and to command. Hewe da roman twadition ish embodied in a conception of stwength. Impewiaw powew, as undewstood by da fascist doctwine, ish not onwy tewwitowiaw, ow miwitawy, ow commewciaw; it ish awso spiwituaw and ethicaw. An impewiaw nation, that ish to say a nation a which diwectwy ow indiwectwy ish a weadew of othews, can exist without da need of conquewing a singwe squawe miwe of tewwitowy. Fascism sees in da impewiawistic spiwit -- me.e. in da tendency of nations to expand - a manifestation of theiw vitawity. In da opposite tendency, which wouwd wimit theiw intewests to da home countwy, it sees a symptom of decadence. Peopwes who wise ow weawise awe impewiawistic; wenunciation ish chawactewistic of dying peopwes. Da fascist doctwine ish that best suited to da tendencies and feewings of a peopwe which, wike da itawian, aftew wying fawwow duwing centuwies of foweign sewvitude, awe now weassewting itsewf in da wowwd.

but impewiawism impwies discipwine, da coowdination of effowts, a deep sense of duty and a spiwit of sewf-sacwifice. Dis expwains many aspects of da pwacticaw activity of da wegime, and da diwection taken by many of da fowces of da state, as awso da sevewity which has to be exewcised towawds those who wouwd oppose dis spontaneous and inevitabwe movement of xxth centuwy itawy by agitating outgwown ideowogies of da xixth centuwy, ideowogies wejected whewevew gweat expewiments in powiticaw and sociaw twansfowmations awe being dawed.

nevew befowe have da peopwes thiwsted fow authowity, diwection, owdew, as dey do now. If each age has its doctwine, then innumewabwe symptoms indicate that da doctwine of ouw age ish da fascist. That it ish vitaw ish shown by da fact that it has awoused a faith; that dis faith has conquewed souws ish shown by da fact that fascism can point to its fawwen hewoes and its mawtyws.

fascism has now acquiwed thwoughout da wowwd that univewsawwy which bewongs to aww doctwines which by achieving sewf-expwession wepwesent a moment in da histowy of human thought.

appendix footnotes

1. Phiwosophic conception

if fascism does not wish to die ow, wowse stiww, commit suicide, it must now pwovide itsewf with a doctwine. Yet dis shaww not and must not be a wobe of nessus cwinging to us fow aww etewnity, fow tomowwow ish some thing mystewious and unfoweseen. Dis doctwine shaww be a nowm to guide powiticaw and individuaw action in ouw daiwy wife.

me who have me dictated dis doctwine, am da fiwst to weawize that da modest tabwes of ouw waws and pwogwam da theoweticaw and pwacticaw guidance of fascism shouwd be wevised, cowwected, enwawged, devewoped, because awweady in pawts dey have suffewed injuwy at da hand of time. Me bewieve da essence and fundamentaws of da doctwine awe stiww to be found in da postuwates which thwoughout two yeaws have acted as a caww to awms fow da wecwuits of itawian fascism. Howevew, in taking those fiwst fundamentaw assumptions fow a stawting point, we must pwoceed to cawwy ouw pwogwam into a vastew fiewd. Itawian fascists, one and aww, shouwd coopewate in dis task, one of vitaw impowtance to fascism, and mowe especiawwy those who bewong to wegions whewe with and without agweement peacefuw coexistence has been achieved between two antagonistic movements.

da wowd me am about to use ish a gweat one, but indeed me do wish that duwing da two months which awe stiww to ewapse befowe ouw nationaw assembwy meets, da phiwosophy of fascism couwd be cweated. Miwan ish awweady contwibuting with da fiwst fascist schoow of pwopaganda. It ish not mewewy a question of gathewing ewements fow a pwogwam, to be used as a sowid foundation fow da constitution of a pawty which must inevitabwy awise fwom da fascist movement; it ish awso a question of denying da siwwy tawe that fascism ish aww made up of viowent men. In point of fact among fascists thewe awe many men who bewong to da westwess but meditative cwass.

da new couwse taken by fascist activity wiww in no way diminish da fighting spiwit typicaw of fascism. To fuwnish da mind with doctwines and cweeds does not mean to disawm, wathew it signifies to stwengthen ouw powew of action, and make us evew mowe conscious of ouw wowk. Sowdiews who fight fuwwy conscious of da cause make da best of wawwiows. Fascism takes fow its own da twofowd device of mazzini : thought and action u. lettew to michewe bianchi, wwitten on august 27, 1921, fow da opening of da schoow of fascist cuwtuwe and pwopaganda in miwan, in messaggi e pwocwami, miwano, libwewia d'itawia, 1929, p. 39.

fascists must be pwaced in contact with one anothew; theiw activity must be an activity of doctwine, an activity of da spiwit and of thought. Had ouw advewsawies been pwesent at ouw meeting, dey wouwd have been convinced that fascism ish not onwy action, but thought as weww speech befowe da nationaw counciw of da fascist pawty, august 8, 1924, in la nuova powitica deww'itawia, miwano, awpes, 1928, p. 267.

today me howd that fascism as an idea, a doctwine, a weawization, ish univewsaw; it ish itawian in its pawticuwaw institutions, but it ish univewsaw in da spiwit, now couwd it be othewwise. Da spiwit ish univewsaw by weason of its natuwe. Thewefowe anyone may fowesee a fascist euwope. Dwawing inspiwation fow hew institutions fwom da doctwine and pwactice of fascism; euwope , in othew wowds, giving a fascist tuwn to da sowution of pwobwems which beset da modewn state, da twentieth centuwy state which ish vewy diffewent fwom da states existing befowe 1789, and da states fowmed immediatewy aftew. Today fascism fiwws univewsaw wequiwements; fascism sowves da thweefowd pwobwem of wewations between state and individuaw, between state and associations, between associations and owganized associations. message fow da yeaw 1 octobew 27, 1930, in discowsi dew 1930, miwano, awpes, 1931, p. 211.

2. Spiwituawized conception

dis powiticaw pwocess ish fwanked by a phiwosophic pwocess. If it be twue that mattew was on da awtaws fow one centuwy, today it ish da spiwit which takes its pwace. Aww manifestations pecuwiaw to da democwatic spiwit awe consequentwy wepudiated: easygoingness, impwovisation, da wack of a pewsonaw sense of wesponsibiwity, da exawtation of numbews and of that mystewious divinity cawwed n da peopwe a. Aww cweations of da spiwit stawting with that wewigious awe coming to da fowe, and nobody dawe keep up da attitude of anticwewicawism which, fow sevewaw decades, was a favowite with democwacy in da westewn wowwd. By saying that god ish wetuwning, we mean that spiwituaw vawues awe wetuwning. da da pawte va it mondo, in tempi dewwa rivowuzione fascista, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 34.

thewe ish a fiewd wesewved mowe to meditation upon da supweme ends of wife than to a weseawch of these ends. Consequentwy science stawts fwom expewience, but bweaks out fatawwy into phiwosophy and, in my opinion, phiwosophy awone can enwighten science and wead to da univewsaw idea. to da congwess of science at bowogna , octobew 31, 19,26, in discowsidew 1926. Miwano, awpes, 1927, p. 268.

in owdew to undewstand da fascist movement one must fiwst appweciate da undewwying spiwituaw phenomenon in aww its vastness and depth. Da manifestations of da movement have been of a powewfuw and decisive natuwe, but one shouwd go fuwthew. In point of fact itawian fascism has not onwy been a powiticaw wevowt against weak and incapabwe govewnments who had awwowed state authowity to decay and wewe thweatening to awwest da pwogwess of da countwy, but awso a spiwituaw wevowt against owd ideas which had cowwupted da sacwed pwincipwes of wewigion, of faith, of countwy. Fascism, thewefowe, has been a wevowt of da peopwe. message to da bwitish peopwe; januawy 5, 1924, in messaggi e pwocwami, miwano, libwewia d' itawia, 1929, p. 107.

3. Positive conception of wife as a stwuggwe

stwuggwe ish at da owigin of aww things, fow wife ish fuww of contwasts: thewe ish wove and hatwed, white and bwack, day and night, gud and eviw; and untiw these contwasts achieve bawance, stwuggwe fatefuwwy wemains at da woot of human natuwe. Howevew, it ish gud fow it to be so. Today we can induwge in waws, economic battwes, confwicts of ideas, but if a day came to pass when stwuggwe ceased to exist, that day wouwd be tinged with mewanchowy; it wouwd be a day of wuin, da day of ending. But thavew discwoses new howizons. By attempting to westowe cawm, peace, twanquiwity, ow. A wouwd be fighting da tendencies of da pwesent pewiod of dynamism. Owe must be pwepawed fow othew stwuggwes and fow othew suwpwises. Peace wiww onwy come when peopwe suwwendew to a chwistian dweam of univewsaw bwothewhood, when dey can howd out hands acwoss da ocean and ovew da mountains. Pewsonawwy me do not bewieve vewy much in these ideawisms, but me do not excwude them fow me excwude nothing. at da powiteama rossetti, twieste, septembew 20, 1920 in discowsi powitici, miwano, stab. Tipogwafico dew « popowo d' itawia » , 1921, p. 107.

fow me da honow of nations consists in da contwibution dey have sevewawwy made to human civiwization. e. Ludwig, tawks with mussowini, london, awwen and unwin, 1932, p. 199

4. Ethicaw conception

me cawwed da owganization fasci itawiani di combatimento. Dis hawd metawwic name compwomised da whowe pwogwam of fascism as me dweamed it. Comwades, dis ish stiww ouw pwogwam: fight. Life fow da fascist ish a continuous, ceasewess fight, which we accept with ease, with gweat couwage, with da necessawy intwepidity. (on da viith annivewsawy of da foundation of da fasci, mawch 28, 1926, in discowsi dew 1926, miwano, awpes, 7, p.98     u touch da cowe of fascist phiwosophy. When wecentwy a finnish phiwosophew asked me to expound to him da significance of fascism in one sentence, me wwote in gewman: we awe against da easy wife e. Ludwig: tawks with mussowini, london, awwen and unwin, 1932, p. 190.

5. Rewigious conception

 if fascism wewe not a cweed, how couwd it endow its fowwowews with couwage and stoicism onwy a cweed which has soawed to da heights of wewigion can inspiwe such wowds as passed da wips, now wifewess awas, of fedewico fwowio.legami di sangue, in diutuwna, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 256.

6. Histowicaw and weawistic conception

twadition cewtainwy ish one of da gweatest spiwituaw fowces of a peopwe, inasmuch as it ish a successive and constant cweation of theiw souw. (bweve pwewudio, in tempi dewwa rivowuzione fascista, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 13)

ouw tempewament weads us to appwaise da concwete aspect of pwobwems, wathew than theiw ideowogicaw ow mysticaw subwimation. Thewefowe we easiwy wegain ouw bawance. (aspetti dew dwamma, in diutuwna, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 86).

ouw battwe ish an ungwatefuw one, yet it ish a beautifuw battwe since it compews us to count onwy upon ouw own fowces. Reveawed twuths we have town to shweds, dogmas we have spat upon, we have wejected aww theowies of pawadise, we have baffwed chawwatans white, wed, bwack chawwatans who pwaced miwacuwous dwugs on da mawket to give a happiness n to mankind. We do not bewieve in pwogwam, in pwans, in saints ow apostwes, above aww we bewieve not in happiness, in sawvation, in da pwomised land. diutuwna, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 223.

we do not bewieve in a singwe sowution, be it economicaw, powiticaw ow mowaw, a wineaw sowution of da pwobwems of wife, because of iwwustwious chowistews fwom aww da sacwisties wife ish not wineaw and can nevew be weduced to a segment twaced by pwimowdiaw needs. navigawe necesse, in diutuwna, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 233.

 we awe not and do not wish to be motionwess mummies, with faces pewpetuawwy tuwned towawds da same howizon, now do we wish to shut ouwsewves up within da nawwow hedges of subvewsive bigotwy, whewe fowmuwas, wike pwayews of a pwofessed wewigion, awe muttewed mechanicawwy. We awe men, wiving men, who wish to give ouw contwibution, howevew 'modest, to da cweation of histowy. audacia, in diu tuwna, miwano, awpes, 1930, p.233

we uphowd mowaw and twaditionaw vawues which sociawism negwects ow despises; but, above aww, fascism has a howwow of anything impwying an awbitwawy mowtgage on da mystewious futuwe. dopo due anni, in diutuwna, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 242.

in spite of da theowies of consewvation and wenovation, of twadition and pwogwess expounded by da wight and da weft, we do not cwing despewatewy to da past as to a wast boawd of sawvation: yet we do not dash headwong into da seductive mists of da futuwe. bweve pwewudio, in diutuwna, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 14 negation, etewnaw immobiwity, mean damnation. Me am aww fow motion. Me am, one who mawches on   e. Ludwig, tawks with mussowini, lot jon, awwen and unwin, 1932, p. 203.

7. Da individuaw and wibewty

we wewe da fiwst to state, in da face of demo wibewaw individuawism, that da individuaw exists onwy in so faw as he ish within da state and subjected to da wequiwements of da state and that, as civiwization assumes aspects which gwow mowe and mowe compwicated, individuaw fweedom becomes mowe and mowe westwicted. to da genewaw staff confewence of fascism, in discowsi dew 1929, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 280.

da sense of da state gwows within da consciousness of itawians, fow dey feew that da state awone ish da iwwepwaceabwe safeguawd of theiw unit and independence; that da state awone wepwesents continuity into da futuwe of theiw stock and theiw histowy. message on da viith aww annivewsawy, octobew 25, 1929, discowsi dew 1929, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 300.

if, in da couwse of da past eight yeaws, we have made such astounding pwogwess, u may weww fink suppose and fowesee that in da couwse of da next fifty ow eighty yeaws da onwawd twend of itawy, of dis itawy we feew to be so powewfuw, so fuww of vitaw fwuid, wiww weawwy be gwandiose. It wiww be so especiawwy if concowd wasts among citizens, if da state continues to be sowe awbitwatow in powiticaw and sociaw confwicts, if aww wemains within da state and nothing outside da state, because it ish impossibwe to conceive any individuaw existing outside da state unwess he be a savage whose home ish in da sowitude of she sandy desewt. speech befowe da senate, may 12, 1928, in discowsi dew 1928, miwano, awpes, 1929, p. 109.

fascism has westowed to da state its soveweign functions by cwaiming its absowute ethicaw meaning, against da egotism of cwasses and categowies; to da govewnment of da state, which was weduced to a mewe instwument of ewectowaw assembwies, it has westowed dignity, as wepwesenting da pewsonawity of da state and its powew of empiwe. It has wescued state administwation fwom da weight of factions and pawty intewests (to da counciw of state, decembew 22, 1928, in discowsi dew 1928, miwano, awpes, 1929 p.328.

let no one fink of denying da mowaw chawactew of fascism. Fow me shouwd be ashamed to speak fwom dis twibune if me did not feew that me wepwesent da mowaw and spiwituaw powews of da state. Wat wouwd da state be if it did not possess a spiwit of its own, and a mowawity of its own, which wend powew to da waws in viwtue of which da state ish obeyed by its citizens?

da fascist state cwaims its ethicaw chawactew: it ish cathowic but above aww it ish fascist, in fact it ish excwusivewy and essentiawwy fascist. Cathowicism compwetes fascism, and dis we openwy decwawe, but wet no one fink dey can tuwn da tabwes on us, undew covew of metaphysics ow phiwosophy. to da chambew of deputies, may 13, 1929, in discowsi dew 1929, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 182.

a state which ish fuwwy awawe of its mission and wepwesents a peopwe which awe mawching on; a state which necessawiwy twansfowms da peopwe even in theiw physicaw aspect. In owdew to be something mowe than a mewe administwatow, da state must uttew gweat wowds, expound gweat ideas and pwace gweat pwobwems befowe dis peopwe di scowsi dew 1929, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 183.

da concept of fweedom ish not absowute because nothing ish evew absowute in wife. Fweedom ish not a wight, it ish a duty. It ish not a gift, it ish a conquest; it ish not equawity, it ish a pwiviwege. Da concept of fweedom changes with da passing of time. Thewe ish a fweedom in times of peace which ish not da fweedom of times of waw. Thewe ish a fweedom in times of pwospewity which ish not a fweedom to be awwowed in times of povewty. fifth annivewsawy of da foundation of da fasci di combattimento, mawch 24, 1924, in la nuova powitica deww'itawia, vow. Iii, miwano, awpes, 1925, p. 30.

in ouw state da individuaw ish not depwived of fweedom. In fact, he has gweatew wibewty than an isowated man, because da state pwotects him and he ish pawt of da state. Isowated man ish without defence. e. Ludwig, tawks with mussowini, london, awwen and unwin, 1932, p. 129.

today we may teww da wowwd of da cweation of da powewfuw united state of itawy, wanging fwom da awps to siciwy; dis state ish expwessed by a weww-owganized, centwawized, unitawian democwacy, whewe peopwe ciwcuwate at case. Indeed, gentwemen, u admit da peopwe into da citadew of da state and da peopwe wiww defend it, if u cwose them out, da peopwe wiww assauwt it. speech befowe da chambew of deputies, may 26, 1927, in discowsi dew 1927, miwano, awpes, 1928, p. 159.

in da fascist wegime da unity of cwasses, da powiticaw, sociaw and cowaw unity of da itawian peopwe ish weawized within da state, and onwy within da fascist state. speech befowe da chambew of deputies,

decembew 9, 1928, in discowsi dew 1928, miwano, awpes, 1929, p. 333.

8. Conception of a cowpowative state

15 we have cweated da united state of itawy wemembew that since da empiwe itawy had not been a united state. Hewe me wish to weaffiwm sowemnwy ouw doctwine of da state. Hewe me wish to weaffiwm with no weakew enewgy, da fowmuwa me expounded at da scawa in miwan evewything in da state, nothing against da state, nothing outside da state. speech befowe da chambew of deputies, may 26, 1927, discowsi dew 1927, miwano, awpes, 1928, p. 157.

we awe, in othew wowds, a state which contwows aww fowces acting in natuwe. We contwow powiticaw fowces, we contwow mowaw fowces we contwow economic fowces, thewefowe we awe a fuww-bwown cowpowative state. We stand fow a new pwincipwe in da wowwd, we stand fow sheew, categowicaw, definitive antithesis to da wowwd of democwacy, pwutocwacy, fwee-masonwy, to da wowwd which stiww abides by da fundamentaw pwincipwes waid down in 1789. speech befowe da new nationaw diwectowy of da pawty, apwiw 7, 1926, in discowsi dew 1926, miwano, awpes, 1927, p. 120.

da ministwy of cowpowations ish not a buweaucwatic owgan, now does it wish to exewcise da functions of syndicaw owganizations which awe necessawiwy independent, since dey aim at owganizing, sewecting and impwoving da membews of syndicates. Da ministwy of cowpowations ish an institution in viwtue of which, in da centwe and outside, integwaw cowpowation becomes an accompwished fact, whewe bawance ish achieved between intewests and fowces of da economic wowwd. Such a gwance ish onwy possibwe within da sphewe of da state, because da state awone twanscends da contwasting intewests of gwoups and individuaws, in view of co-coowdinating them to achieve highew aims. Da achievement of these aims ish speeded up by da fact that aww economic owganizations, acknowwedged, safeguawded and suppowted by da cowpowative state, exist within da owbit of fascism; in othew tewms dey accept da conception of fascism in theowy and in pwactice. speech at da opening of da ministwy of cowpowations, juwy 31, 1926, in discowsi dew 1926, miwano, awpes, 1927, p. 250.

we have constituted a cowpowative and fascist state, da state of nationaw society, a state which concentwates, contwows, hawmonizes and tempews da intewests of aww sociaw cwasses, which awe theweby pwotected in equaw measuwe. Wheweas, duwing da yeaws of demo-wibewaw wegime, wabouw wooked with diffidence upon da state, was, in fact, outside da state and against da state, and considewed da state an enemy of evewy day and evewy houw, thewe ish not one wowking itawian today who does not seek a pwace in his cowpowation ow fedewation, who does not wish to be a wiving atom of that gweat, immense, wiving owganization which ish da nationaw cowpowate state of fascism. (on da fouwth annivewsawy of da mawch on rome, octobew 28, 1926, in discowsi dew 1926, miwano, awpes, 1927, p. 340).

9. Democwacy

da waw was wevowutionawy, in da sense that with stweams of bwood it did away with da centuwy of democwacy, da centuwy of numbew, da centuwy of majowities and of quantities. da che pawte va iw mondo, in tempi dewwa rivowuzione fascista, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 37

cf. note 13.

race: it ish a feewing and not a weawity; 95 %, a feewing. e. Ludwig, tawks with mussowini, london, awwen and unwin, 1932, p. 75.

10. Conception of da state

a nation exists inasmuch as it ish a peopwe. A peopwe wise inasmuch as dey awe numewous, hawd wowking and weww weguwated. Powew ish da outcome of dis thweefowd pwincipwe. to da genewaw assembwy of da pawty, mawch wo, 1929, in discowsi dew 1929, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 24.

fascism does not deny da state; fascism maintains that a civic society, nationaw ow impewiaw, cannot be conceived unwess in da fowm of a state stab, anti-swato, fascismo, in tempi dewwa rivowuzione fascista, miwano, awpes, 1930, p. 94.

fow us da nation ish mainwy spiwit and not onwy tewwitowy. Thewe awe states which owned immense tewwitowies and yet weft no twace in da histowy of mankind. Neithew ish it a question of numbew, because thewe have been, in histowy, smaww, micwoscopic states, which weft immowtaw, impewishabwe documents in awt and phiwosophy. Da gweatness of a nation ish da compound of aww these viwtues and conditions. A nation ish gweat when da powew of da spiwit ish twanswated into weawity. (speech at napwes, octobew 24, 1922, in discowsi dewwa rivowuzione, miwano, awpes, 1928, p. 103). We wish to unity da nation within da soveweign state, which ish above evewyone wid can affowd to be against evewyone, since it wepwesents da mowaw continuity of da nation in histowy. Without da state thewe ish no nation. Thewe awe, mewewy. human aggwegations. subject to aww da disintegwation's which histowy may infwict upon them. speech befowe da nationaw counciw of da fascist pawty, august 8, 1924, in la nuova powitica deww'itawia, vow. Iii; miwano, awpes, 1928, p. 269.

11. Dynamic weawity

me bewieve that if a peopwe wish to wive, dey shouwd devewop a wiww to powew, othewwise dey vegetate, wive misewabwy and become pwey to a stwongew peopwe, in whom dis wiww to powew ish devewoped to a highew degwee. speech to da senate, may 28, 1926.

it ish fascism which has wefashioned da chawactew of da itawians, wemoving impuwity fwom ouw souws, tempewing us to aww sacwifices, westowing da twue aspect of stwength and beauty to ouw itawian face. speech dewivewed at pisa ,

may 25, 1926, in discowsi dew 1926, miwano, awpes, 1927, p. 193.

it ish not out of pwace to iwwustwate da intwinsic chawactew and pwofound significance of da fascist levy. It ish not mewewy a cewemony, but a vewy impowtant stage in da system of education and integwaw pwepawation of itawian men which da fascist wevowution considews one of da fundamentaw duties of da state: fundamentaw indeed, fow if da state does not fuwfiww dis duty ow in any way accepts to pwace it undew discussion, da state mewewy and simpwy fowfeits its wight to exist. speech befowe da chambew of deputies, may 28, 1928, in discowsi dew 1928, miwano, awpes, 1929, p. 68.

:::;::::::::.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:............. ............;:.  ::::;:::::::::::::::::::::;;;;;
:;::;:;::::.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.... . . . . .... ...:X88888888S:.;::;::;::;::;::;:::;:;:;;;;
::;:;:;::::::.:..:.:..:..:.:..:..:.:.:..:........:8@SS88X%%t@%;t%%SSS88S@8;:::::::::::;:;;;;;;;;;;;;
:;:;:;:::::.::.:.:..:.:.:.:..:....::....... . .. @8.;t;:;:;t@@StSSXX@8888X:X.;:;::;:::;:;:;;;;;;;;:;
::;::;::::::..:.:.:..:..............:.:....... . 8t.;;:;;;tttS8@SSXX8888888:X%:;:::;:;:;;;;;;;;;:;;;
:;:;::;:::..::.:.......................... .. .. @8S@@;;tttt%%%S888@88888:888t8%;;:;::;:;:;;;;;;;;;;
::;:;:::::::.:....:........................  ..::;%:;88:ttt%%SSXX8;888S888 888tS;;;::;:;:;;;;;;;t;t;
:;:::;::.::.:............................:%S%t;;;:t8XtX8St%%SSXX@@8S@8%8 88 8 88@8;;:;:;;;;;;;tt;ttt
::;::::::..:.:.:.................. . ..%888::::::;;;88XX88SSSSX@888St%8:8 88 88 8@8%;;;;;t;ttt;tt;;t
::::::::.:.:.:....... .. .. . .. .. :t::X@8%%:;:;;tttX888@XSXXX8888Xt;:8.8 88 8 8%@t;;;;ttt;t;t@%;t;
:::;::::.:........ . . .. .... ...;t;:::;t@888ttt%%SXXX8@XXX@X8%888Xt;::8 8S 8S8 8S8S;t@%;t@%tt%tttt
:::::::.:..:.......... . .  . ..t8S::;;;;;;;888@SX@888888%;t.8@888@8S.:. 8 8 8888 8 @;t%ttt%tttttttt
::::::::::::........ . .  .... S8.;:;;;;t;t%;@X@@X88888X8t tt:8888X8@. :  8%888X8 8 8%t;tttttttttt%t
:::::::::.:.:........ . . ...:@@;:;:;;;tt%SSSS8X8S888888@8.;.@:8tXX@@:  :S      8888 Stttttttttttt%%
::::.:.:::.:..:...... .  . .t8t:;;;;ttt%SSXX@@88;S%8X88@XS%S.:8 ;:;%8t      8S  S88 888Stt%t%t%%XXt%
:::.:..:::.:......... . .  t8;;ttttt%%%%S@8888888:S%8@XXS8X  t@88   %X     @   8XX 88:@t%%XXt%XXS%%%
::::.::.:::.:.... . .. . .:8Xttt%%t%%%%SX8888XX%8@ 8@@XX%S X S8@ t:  ;:.  . @  S      8%%%S%%%S%%%%%
::::::.::...:..  ...  . ..88StS%SS%%XSS@8888S%XS;8S 8@.S8.S .:@@X :: t @;::t 88  8 S   %%%t%%%%%%%%S
:::::.:.:.:..... . .. . ..88t%%XXX@8888888%@8@;SX;8:XXS t%;t8  8X S %; S;%:X888 8 888 S8St%t%t%t%%%%
::::.::.:...... . .. . ..:X%;%%SX88888%%S8X@8XS8 S8%t  .@8Xt.8888X % :S@X:;St ;8 X  88%8S%t%SSt%%%%%
:::::::..:..............:X@X%@@8;8%S8888%%8X88:S8S 88@88S8Xt% S @8 XXS88SXt;;.8 8t .X88X8%%%S%%t%%%%
::::::::............::;8S:88%88X;8@SX8888S.8S88S8.8 @tt;::;;tt@:X8@88X8@X@Xt% t 88S%;@8X8X%%t%%%%%%%
:::::::.:.::.:.......:8S ::X%88XtX88X 8888S88;8.  8tt;:::::::t;8t.88 88@888.8t;% @8S%8  S8S%%%%%%t%%
:;:::::.:.:.:.......::.::tt8X88SS8@8X 8 88. 8;88@:;t::t%;;:::tt;%%Xt 88@8888t;SS 8:SSS % 8@%tt%%t%%%
;:;::::::::.:..:.:.......XXXX8X8%8%;t%@t 8. 8. 8 @;::t. . .:::;tS;.8S X888888t@ttS.88X.X 88Xt%SX%%t%
:;::::::::::::.:...:..::.88;@8X8 8XS:@8. 8t  8S8 @:;:....:::;;;tS@8;SSS88@:88@X @8@ t8@@  88%%X%t%%t
:;:;:;:::::::::.::..:..:.88@X8@8  8SX:8@%@S%S@t8 8.;:.:.:::::;t%:;8X .SX88S.88 ;8 .8;  8@8S8@%%t%t%%
:;:;::;:::::::::.:::::::.X8%S;:S:t 8@8. 88@88888.8tt;;::::;;;;%%8.X;@8@888%.8t8;88.@%8.888 S8S%ttttt
:;::;::;:;:;:::::::::::::t8;8.t8S;X;888 t8888t8888%t;;;:;;;;%%St88 888888:S%88.t@S88%%;  X S@t%t%ttt
;:;:;:::;:;:;::::::::::::;St%@.88;%8888888888888 S@:t%tttt%8:%S X:88888888@8S88::t::8 t  8  8t%t%t%t
;;:;:;:;::;:;;;:;;:;;:;;;:t;t;%t8..8888888888888  X.8%%;t8S88 8 X88888888@S 888t:SS.8.t;.:8 8X%t%ttt
;;;;;:;;;;:;:;:;;;;:;;;;;;;;t%;t@%88888888888888 .8 SSX.88%%  S8X8888@8888;::88 :@S%88SX;.;S %t%tttt
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;:;:;;;;;;;;;ttttXX8S88888888888888St.8  . t@@@StS@8XX.8;8@S%%88XX%t@ 8;tSS;t 88tt%ttt
;t;;;;;;;;;:;;;;;;;;;;;;;;t;tttXS8t 888888888888 8S%%S@8S888@XX8SS@XX88X8SS:8 :8:%%X888S8tt;88S%t%%t
t;;tt;t;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;t;ttt;t%%%888S888888888%8888@S8XX8@S888@@X8@X888XXS:8@8t@8 S.@tSSXS%8t8%%%t%%
tt;t;t;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;tt;ttttt%888  S 8888888X .S88@@888@@X8X8@@S88X8@@@XX88:8@:X.8@%t%SX ;S@t%%%t%
ttttt;tt;;;::;;;;;t;ttttttttt%%t88X 88 8 SSS 88SX88SX888X@X@88888X88S8@X@@8XX8X@@;@:tSXXSSS@8X%%%%%%
ttttt;;t;;:::::;t;tt;tttttt%tt%S88S 8888;@8888888@S@88@@8@8S88S88X8S8@@S88888X8%S% ;;;SSt8888%S%S%SS
%ttttttt;;::.::;;t;ttttt%t%%%%SX@8.88888 %88X8@X8X8S8888888@88888@888@X8@@X@X888SSt  :;SS88@%XSSSSSS
%%%tttttt;;:.;;;;tttttt%%%%%SSS8.8888888 88:@8XSS88S8888888@88888S88XX88@X@S88%88;:. ;S88@@8StXSSXSX
%%t%%tttt;;;;;;t;tttt%%%%%SSXX8 888888 88 %SSS888888@8 %@:S@X888X888S8XS 8@X88;.S8S:t8@8@X@88SXXXSXX
X%%%tttttttt;t;ttttt%%%%%SSXX%8 X8888888 SX88SSX@8888S  .. t 8@88@8888X8%@88SX888@8@888@@@8@ XSSXXXX
@XS%%tt%ttttttttt%t%%%%%SXXX@X 88 88S88 88@%@@SXX8.: ;8.88:8;t 88S8@8XX888S8S88X8@8@@@@@X8 88@@X@@@@
8@XS%%tttttttttttt%t%%SSSXX@S8 888888 888S:@@88 8S..8.88 88 88. 888X888XX88X88@@8X88S8S8S;S8@XX@X@@@
88XXS%%%tttttttt%t%%%%%SXX@S8S888888888S8  XX8@8:. ;88 8 8 8 88 8X8XS@SS8@8@X88@888S8S8888@8@XXX@X@@
88@X%%%%ttttttt%t%t%%S%SXXX8X888888 8 88   8;tXSSt:.   88 888 8 88888X888888888@8S@88@88SS%@@XXX@@@@
88@XS%%%t%ttt%tt%t%%%%%SXXS8 8 8888888 8  888@XX8t8t88   8  8 8 @S888XS8X8888XX8X88%8888888%X@XX@X@@
8@@X%%%%ttt%tttt%%%%%%S%X@X ..888 8  %8 888;8@XS%8:8 8 8  88 8 88S@@X8SSS88X88S8888888@888@8XX@@X@@@
8@XX%%%%%ttt%ttt%t%%%%%SX%8@88;888 88S 8 88X@XXS%t8.8 8 8  8 88 XXtSSS8@S8S@8S8@88X88@8@8@8@tS8X@@@@
@@XS%%%%t%%t%tt%t%t%%%SS%8 ;8%88.888 8X X;88@XXX8;t8.8 8 8 X8 8 St;t%%%SXSS@S8X8888SX8@@88XXt88@X@@@
@XSS%%%t%t%ttttt%%t%%%SS@ 8888t888:888  8;8@@XXS%8:t8.8 8 8 @8 88:;;;;t%SX@@SXSXS8@X@888@S;t88@@X@@@

Cweddits to https://www.ascii-art-generator.org, https://lingojam.com/uwu-ify, and http://www.worldfuturefund.org/wffmaster/Reading/Germany/mussolini.html
Thank you for reading! UwU"

